Java.
Never thought we'd do an episode on that,
did you? Java
for serverless functions. Did I hear that right?
We get a chance to talk with Atavio
Santana,
is a Java champion,
Kubernetes expert,
and loves to make dad jokes, especially at
David's expense.
And believe it or not, I actually left
this episode kind of writing to one some
Java.
Maybe.
We did mention Russ though.
Enjoy the episode. Welcome to today's episode, Otavio.
You are gonna teach us about something that
I generally consider a curse word, and that
is Java.
But we're gonna look at this in a
fresh light and understand how to be successful
with Cloud Native and Java on top of
Kubernetes.
We'll try not to talk about Rust, I
guess. Right? Is that the plan? There's a
plan, ours.
Okay.
Just to to reply the answer, how can
you use Java of Kubernetes and success? That's
easy.
Don't use Java.
That's that's what I was expecting right off
the bat. Fuck.
Well, alright. That was the end of the
episode. I will just keep on moving here.
Thank you. No. I'm just kidding.
Alright. But alright. So so first, before we
get into that, right, I know we're gonna
have a great conversation about Java, but I
want people to understand who you are and
what you've been up to. So for anyone
who's not familiar with you and your work,
please take a few moments to introduce yourself
and share anything that you wish.
Okay. So super glad to be here. My
name is Altave Santana. Most of the time,
I do jokes,
mainly dad jokes.
Sometimes,
hard lever, I do some code, especially around
cloud native, especially because
that is what I do love. The job
in the Java community is help people to
engage them
and move the organization forward using the most
effective techniques,
using the Java Enterprise Notifications,
for example,
under the Jakarta,
that is under Eclipse Foundation. So
my goal is basically to help Java developers
and software engineers to make them more effective
and take advantage of open source
and naturally exploring more about cloud, the cloud
native perspectives.
Yeah. I love that you said to help
people, but that you rarely write code. To
write oh, yeah. So you're a consultant, aren't
you? Yes. I took a look at your
website, and I clicked on the awards page,
and there was, like, 30 different things there.
So you've been doing this Java stuff for
a while. And I think you've even written,
like, eight books. Right? So maybe you can
give us a bit of history. How long
have you been doing Java?
What's your background? Anything else you wanna share
there? It's a long time doing Java.
More than I wish, by the You can
see my white hairs.
So since Java eight, I have been working
Java.
So if you hate Java on that time,
sorry.
I did my best to make Java
as good as possible, but it's hard.
I've helped several Java
specifications
through the JCP,
where I become
an executive member of the JCP. So if
you're not familiar with JCP, it's basically the
organization who defines
and drives the Java community.
Java does not belong to Oracle
at all. So we do have several organizations,
several communities working
on the process in Java. We do have
a huge ecosystems,
people,
organizations,
enterprise, and so on,
even open source organizations
such as Apache and Eclipse Foundation.
And I have been working with
Java since Java eight.
And with
the impact in moving the Java Enterprise to
a Tilts Foundation,
I went
and to a Tilts Foundation worked on those
Java Enterprise,
where, yes, I received some awards
like the JCP Awards, the All Categories,
the Duke Choice Awards, that is the Oscar
of Java,
Actives
Subcommuter,
and so on.
My secret is just don't have social life.
Who cares about people. Right? So just focus
in code. Alright. Awesome. So
I'm gonna date myself here. Right? But I
haven't written Java. So there's Java I'm gonna
say 1.4.
I was in college. This was early two
thousands. I didn't enjoy it. I never wrote
it again. I dropped out of college. I
hated it so much, actually, and got a
job right in Peril, which looking back, probably
not my smartest move, but, you know, whatever.
Tell me about the evolution of Java over
the last,
you know, ten to fifteen years. Well, you
know, from Java eight to where we are
today because obviously the language is evolving, it's
modernizing,
we have containers now.
I'm assuming we don't just throw Tomcat servers
on the Internet and run our applications anymore.
Like, what is and where is Java today?
So Java is in the version 23.
Right now, we are
thirty years old of history and experience,
few improvements in the language. For example, to
handle data with string API,
a new API to handle with data.
We have the
coin project where the goal is to simplify
the Java syntax,
such as diamonds,
to work with some generic keys
on the best way as possible. We do
have Record to work with data.
On the infrastructure,
a way to save Java, we have several
improvements
on the JVMs,
garbage collectors. Right now, we do have the
T1 to work better
and avoid stop the words,
the nightmare of anybody who has a huge
application.
Several improvements to modules
and improvements to the container.
When I mention container, don't think only about
Docker, think about the open container.
So
this way that we have designed the JVM
right now is to
make sure that
almost all containers that have Java will take
advantage of the JVM.
So
it's a total different Java
since Java four. It's a huge, huge time
ago. Let's revisit
your joke from the start of the episode.
If you wanna be successful with Java on
Kubernetes, don't use Java. Right? Let's let's actually
dig into this a little bit. Yeah. Because,
you know, we're looking at the cloud native
landscape today.
Apple have just released pickle, which is a
conflict management, which was built in Java.
We've got Kafka, which is the almost the
facto
service bus, queued topic, whatever, a whole bunch
of different things. Right? It does a whole
lot of these things
built on Java. We've got Elasticsearch built on
Java. I mean, Cloud Native
has a lot of Java components and its
ecosystem and production,
shipping, and making money for a whole bunch
of companies. So, you know, can people our
people are being successful, but
how do we get to this stage where
Java as in the enterprise software is the
modern cloud native microservice
approach to building software?
Yeah. My first advice is work to the
most up to date JVM as possible. I
know several companies try to keep on Java
eight, Java four, and so on.
But if you do that, you won't be
able to take the most updated
enhancement on the JVM, for example, to work
better with
Kubernetes,
with Docker,
or any kind of container.
If you take a look, for example,
at the beginning of Java eight,
every time that
it worked with Java in the container,
there was an issue because for the JVM,
there was not the container.
It took the whole machine
instead of considering
just the container that is inside.
Right now, we take that into consideration.
So if Java
is running inside
a container,
we are taking a look in several
enhancements in the SYS operation as well.
Right now, we do have more
modern applications to avoid the huge start time
that Java had.
If you remember some time ago, Java took
a couple of seconds to warm up the
application.
Right now, we do have several frameworks
that can do it a couple seconds,
like any dynamic language.
So,
Quackle sometimes might be faster than Node. Js
because it can be converted
to native language, for example. I can convert
the JVM to native
instructions
using GraalVM,
for example.
So the Java ecosystem
is huge.
And the good way to take advantage of
that in the Java, in the JVM itself,
is keeping your ecosystem
updated.
What I said, the huge trade off that
we do have in Java,
keep the compatibility.
That means when you move between versions,
the impact
might be super time,
especially because the way that we design
is to keep this way. So if you
are in Java eight and move to Java
23,
20 four, whatever,
the impact of doing that might be super
tiny.
Naturally,
you can write more code with less
methods because have more SUGA syntax inside Java.
So my first advice is keep updated with
Java.
Every six months, we're gonna have a release,
and
we have a huge ecosystem right now. So
with Spring, Jakarta, Quackos, Micronauts,
and on, and so on. Yeah. So I
I think the crux of what you said
there. If I remember correctly, before Java eight,
the problem was the JVM didn't respect the
control groups of Linux. Right? So when you
run a container and say, you have access
to one CPU and a 20 mega RAM,
If the JVM had no idea those constraints
were in place, it would outscale what it
was doing. It would get, you know, broken
to a certain degree and and then not
work any longer. So you're saying that from
Java eight, those are now respected, and it's
it plays a part in the container ecosystem,
which is really good to know. So
and, obviously, I'm assuming, again, I don't know
that space,
but Java is not oblivious to the fact
that containers and Kubernetes exist over here. So
they're they're they're considering it as a target
platform. Containers and production is where the JVM,
whoever the governing bodies are, the Eclipse Foundation
and others want to push the project forward
so that it is a first class citizen.
Is that a correct assumption?
Yes. Yes. If you have several companies, organizations
looking for it, that's where we should go.
For example, a long, long time ago, the
OpenJDK,
the JVM
reference implementations,
because, yes, in Java,
we have the specifications,
we do have
the spec,
and we have multiple implementations.
The reference
implementation
used to be Mercurial,
And because a lot of people did a
pressure to move to GitHub,
the organization decided to move on to GitHub
because they want to collaborate even more.
So, yes, basically,
we are driven by community because a lot
of people,
committers
are from the community,
including myself, for example.
So now my my thought process is, right,
Java is modernizing, is container native to a
certain degree, is moving in the right direction
to be where other software is in 2025.
Right? From my understanding, again, so limited and
I wish I had done a bit more
Java in my life. Right? Don't worry. Don't
worry. The JVM Wait. We we just had
that on recording, by the way. No. What
I mean is, the JVM was You leave
Java. What could be worse?
You could leave Rust.
Woah. Woah.
Woah. I'm shitty. Okay. Here we go. Read
the read the room.
Oh. Alright. Sorry. Go ahead. Sorry. I'm really
enjoying this. I think what people always told
me when I go to conferences and events,
what they loved about the GVM, right, is
that you run your application on the GVM
and it runs for days, weeks, months, years.
The GVM had this wonderful ability to actually
dynamically modify code paths over time and optimize.
Right?
Do I mean, how much of that has
been sacrificed in order to support ephemeral workloads
in Kubernetes? Like, at what point
does the JVM stop being famous for its
optimization for long running workloads and hot code
pass to just being another
runtime in there. And there's nothing wrong with
being another runtime. Rust is just another runtime.
Go is just another runtime. There's nothing special
about them. But the JVM was always special
and it was enterprise. It was mainframe. It
did optimizations,
and this is now going away. What's your
thoughts on the trade offs that are being
made? That's a beauty of Java. As I
mentioned before, we do have multiple JVMs.
And that mean we can have specialized
JVMs to each scenario. For example, Azure,
they do they have they have several JVMs
that include one specialized
to run-in containers.
We also have, for example, GrauVM that can
convert your code to native.
It's super doable to use as native. For
example,
if I want to use serverless,
I don't need to have
garbage collector on that situation, right? I'm going
to up the application, run and queue the
application.
I don't need to have
GIT. I don't need to have garbage collector.
I don't need to have any enhancement
around the JVM because at the end I
will start running queue.
So
in Java, as I said, we do have
a huge ecosystem to make it that configurable
or
you can change the product if without changing
your code. That's the beauty of Java. So,
okay, I want to use right now the
Graph VM and convert my code to native
because I want to use serverless.
K. Go ahead. You might change your framework,
and that is it. Or I want to
use a Azure.
Go ahead. And we have a
couple of different implementations to make it possible.
Okay. I think the title of this episode
is just gonna be the one where David
was ignorant because I'm learning so much about
what I don't know about the Java ecosystem.
Like, the fact that there's multiple
JVM implementations,
again, as far as I'm concerned, it was
just the stunt microsystem one. You go to
the website, you click download. So, like, it's
my knowledge in this space is very, very
dated. But I have,
you know, through my periphery, kept an eye
on the Graal project because I've always thought
it was really interesting that they're allowing us
to take JVM languages and get that native
code. Essentially,
to the best of my understanding, cross compilation
from Java bytecode to ELF binaries or whatever
system you're targeting. Is that correct?
Yes.
Especially because right now, we do have this
serverless reality. Right?
The point of Java
is
the same challenge that we do have for
any software.
Java is thirty years old, right? Nobody realizes
that you're going to need serverless application thirty
three years, right?
And that is what Java is doing. So
it's make it possible using
all the best techniques of the evolutionary
architecture
to refactoring your code if without changing behavior
it make modules
to make it possible to have multiple scenarios.
I used to say that open source goes
beyond philosophy.
It's the most advanced software engineer in the
world. I mean, if you want to learn
how to do a good software,
just go to any open source project.
We can do that using
tasks to keep the behavior. You can
have a good documentations.
You can leave, if without, thousands of meetings.
We can write emails instead of that.
That might look impossible for you, who is
manager, but, yes, we can survive if without
manager, if a lot of meetings.
Right. If someone had told me an hour
ago that they were doing Java as serverless,
I would have laughed. And now I'm like,
shit, I'm gonna have to try this.
Now, I haven't really done a lot of
Java myself since,
like, six years ago or something like that.
But I I have heard a lot about
various projects.
I think I've heard a little bit about
Quarkus.
Don't know much about it.
But I guess my question is, like, how
big is this ecosystem now? Like,
I kind of am in the same spot
as David and that I don't know a
ton about it, but I've heard a lot
of various bits and pieces here and there.
Woah. So, like, is is it like
there's hundreds of thousands of options, or are
we talking, really, there's only, like, two or
three that you probably should explore first before
diving into the rest of it? No.
Do have a huge we have a huge
ecosystem in Java. Oculus is the one, for
example. We do have Spring.
If you want to use, for example, more
the
Java Enterprise specification
or Jacala, for example,
we can see GlassFish,
Piranha,
Caledon,
Open Liberty,
it's a huge amount of implementation.
If I should do a ballparking
I guess around
25,
30 ecosystems
that you can use explore.
Gotcha.
That makes sense. What do you think is
the best one?
Know. I'm asking you to name your favorite.
None of those. Ross is.
Oh. Oh, there we go.
David's on my good grades. There we go.
You knew it was coming. But I'm super
rusty, rusty.
So I start to doing the record team
rusty right now. There you go. Well, this
must lead on to my next question. So
absolutely perfect segue here. Right? But I wanted
to ask you a personal question. There's possibly
a hard question. Right? I'm assuming you're aware
other languages exist.
Right? You probably played It does. As you
said, you could maybe do a little bit
of Rust. I would love to know
what is your draw to Java. Like, when
you look at all these languages and you
think this is cool and this is cool,
maybe you could even share two other languages
you think are interesting. But then at the
end of the day, you are saying I
like to write Java, and I'd love to
know what how do we sell it to
the people listening to this episode? Why should
they write Java? So
tell me, why did you come back to
it? I enjoy a lot of language. Jokes
aside, I tried Rust, Kotlin, Python,
and I do believe tools
are tools. Right? I need to use the
best choice to my scenario.
I really believe that.
Doesn't matter how amazing Java is,
Java is not religion.
It's just the best option in the world,
but it's not religion. Alright. Let me reframe
that question for you. Sorry. Because you dodged
it very nicely. It's supposed to be serious.
Let's just stop. There's
no seriousness on this podcast. Okay. So you
can point out that it's fine.
The more trolling of David we can do,
the better. Okay. I'll take note on that.
Well, what I'm thinking is, right, what we
want people to get away is a fresh
perspective on Java. Right? I know myself coming
into this, you know, we've got blinkers.
You know, I've been writing Rust for a
while and Go for longer than that. And,
you know, to me, Java has this perception
in my head of just being an antiquated
enterprise language. And that's not the case. I
know that's not the case. Yes. But we
have these, you know, misconceptions.
And what I want people to walk away
from this episode about is, well, maybe I
should give it a second look and maybe
I should play with it. But the crux
of the question is
they wanna write cloud native microservices,
and you're not gonna go down to GVM
and do that right away. There's there's decisions
that need to be made. I'm assuming this
comes down to adopting a framework that is
microservice ready. But, you know, maybe in three,
four, five steps, however many takes,
give the audience that journey. If you wanna
write a microservice right now in Java,
what are their options, and what do they
have to do?
Okay.
As I said, we have a huge amount
of solution in the market.
Let's use the let's use Lara's sample.
He mentioned backwards, right?
So I can do a microservice
with
two classes,
where one
is my NT class and my second one
is my interface,
and that is it.
Right now, I do have my crude operation
using REST,
and I can move it to a cloud
native or container,
whatever wish.
So
you can really make it fast with Java,
especially with the newest frameworks.
The biggest challenge with Java is people
are learning Java 1.4
and
believe that Java did not change for that.
No offense, David, but it
changed a lot.
And what happened also is
we have new modern frameworks with Java. So
Spring does a really
beautiful job.
As I mentioned, Quark was with two classes.
Spring provides something pretty similar to that.
Of course, the beauty of Java is the
ecosystem.
You can have Quackus
with pretty similar capabilities
using
two interface
or so on. I wanna use Spring, so
you can explore Spring Data where you define
your entity and then with the interface
they will handle the whole database connection for
you.
Or you want to use everything by your
bare hands, go for it.
You have a huge amount of flavors with
Java. The easiest way, as I said, or
the most complex way,
for some random reason, once you learn how
these things happen behind, you can go explore
for it.
About why I learn Java, the stability of
the language, the ecosystem,
the community.
A huge amount of people are behind Java
right now. So, if you compare it to
another language, for example,
as far I know, Microsoft C only
has a single component behind it, right? That
is Microsoft.
So, if Microsoft decided to, okay, I want
to move,
the language is gone. In Java, the chance
that's happened is pretty low because if Oracle
decides to leave, okay,
we do have another huge amount of organizations
working in Java right now.
Again, thousands of JVMs, thousands of solutions, and
so on.
And inside the GCP, we do have the
Java Education Ecosystems
to take a look on
how to learn Java and take care of
the new generations.
That's why we do have the RAB
and new features to make sure that people
can learn
easily Java
and break this myth about Java is super
hard,
is understandable,
and so on.
Another point that I'd love to highlight in
Java is
mainly because Java is a production language.
And
verbose is to make easy to read and
understand your code, especially because on production,
on finance,
we also need to read code. It's not
about read writing features.
It's about to read and maintain
what you have. And sometimes
we have code for
ten, fifteen years ago, so it
needs to be readable as much as possible.
So it's a trade off of language. At
the end, we are handled with the language
design and language decisions
and naturally, okay, I will explore
the verbosity of Java here
to make it more readable or I will
try to reduce
as much as possible, make the code sometimes
not readable.
But even for that, Java has, for example,
the var variables. So you can do the
var a equals something.
So the ecosystem Java is super frequent. So
come to Java. Fuck. I think I wanna
erase some Java.
Alright. And Do wanna go first? Every time
that you download Java, the JVM right now,
you will receive a wine, free wine by
David.
Oh. Oh. What? What's
this?
I guess one of my questions is how
often do you run into the misconception
that Java is still all Oracle
after they you know, because Sun is the
the originator of Java, everybody thinks that, oh,
look. Sun got bought by Oracle. Therefore, Java
is an Oracle thing. How often do you
run into that?
I see the question
all the time.
Oh, I bet. I bet. Every single day.
Especially because if you look to another language,
it's not happened more often, right? For example,
Kotlin usually it has a huge community but
it's supported by a unique company, Go, if
I'm not mistaken, the same.
If you're looking to, I guess, PHP has
a different approach.
But in general, we do have a huge
company behind
with people contributing into.
So naturally, the people think about, okay, it
might be the same with Java,
but not. Java has a huge
JCP, Java community process,
to make sure that we do have a
huge transparency
on the JSR,
the Java specification request,
where people can vote, you can review,
and it does not belong only to a
single company. It's a failed tolerance
in
the process.
Great.
You mentioned Kotlin there. I think that's the
programming language that spun out of
JetBrains, if I remember correctly. Right? Yes. Yes.
There's also Scala,
there's Clojure. I'm sure there's other major JVM
based languages. Like, are they still important in
2025,
given the fact that the Java language itself
is continuing to evolve? Is the need for
these other languages becoming less? Or are those
still pushing forward and innovating in their own
right? And at what point do you jump
between the languages when you're under JVM, or
do you stick firmly within the Java camp
itself?
I'll say
with Java
and the JVM specification,
but as highlight,
the JVM does not understand Java code.
The JVM understands
byte. So at the end, if the language
generates byte code for Java, it doesn't matter.
Okay? About those languages
from Java,
like Scala,
Kotlin, and so on, those
have some
specializations,
some niche. For example, as far as Kotlin
goes mostly around mobile
application with Android,
Scala goes more to
functional programming,
if I'm not mistaken on that.
I do believe those are important and makes
the Java ecosystem great.
However, those grow more to the niche. And
Java
brings more the generic approach. So you can
do a little bit of functional programming with
Java.
You can do a little bit of object
oriented programming Java,
data oriented programming Java, and so on.
So
it's not specialized,
it's specialized like another language,
but
with Java you can do a little bit
of those
features
directly.
Awesome. Thank you. Alright. Okay.
Is there any question you would like us
to ask you before we wrap this up?
Do you know why we have Google Chrome
and Slack right now?
No?
So you want us to ask you, so
why why do we have Google Chrome and
Slack right now?
To prove the JVX is not happy
like everybody said. Interesting. I don't get it.
Can elaborate if you want. I'm really I'm
really happy. This is giving me a lot
of fit for thought. Like, I never thought
I'd be considering writing any Java, but knowing
that it's a language that's modernized to the
point I can run it successfully in a
container. I love what Apple are doing with
pickle, and I'm like, you know, am I
missing out on something by not playing with
this? My my old rusty head is going,
oh, maybe I need to start poking this
thing again. So So now now I know
why you kept shoving all that Java code
off onto me
when we were at the same company. Yeah.
Okay. I understand now. Thanks for joining us.
If you wanna keep up with us, consider
subscribing to the podcast on your favorite podcasting
app or even go to cloudnativecompass.fm.
And if you want us to talk with
someone specific or cover a specific topic,
reach out to us on any social media
platform.
Until next time when exploring the cloud native
landscape
on 3. On 3. 1,
2,
3.
Don't forget your Don't forget your compass.